In some of our other videos on SQL, we
cover the basic commands using SQL queries
and how to extract data from
multiple tables using joints.
In this short video, we're going to talk
about a different way of bringing data
from multiple tables together
using the UNION command.
When we learned about joining
tables together, we really focused
on how to enrich rows of data by
adding columns from different tables.
You can think of this as kind
of a left right operation.
We have some data on the left and
some data on the right, and
we want to bring them together.
We do this using a joint operation.
We can also think about bringing
tables together top to bottom.
Meaning that if we have two sets of data
with similar types of rows, we can sort of
stack the data on top of each other to
get one taller data set with more rows.
To do this, we use the UNION command.
The syntax of the UNION
command looks like this.
Here I have two simple SELECT from clauses
with the UNION command between them.
The key requirement for
performing a UNION is that the top and
bottom data sets need to have
the same number of columns.
And those columns need to represent
the same set of ideas in the same order.
So in this case, the type of data in
FIELD_A from the top SELECT clause needs
to match the type of data in FIELD_D
on the bottom SELECT clause.
The type of data in FIELD_B needs to
match the type of data in FIELD_E and
the type of data in FIELD_C needs to
match the type of data in FIELD_F.
Note that I said the type of data,
not the column name.
The column names do not have to match.
But the type of data in those
columns do have to match.
So if FIELD_A is a number then
FIELD_D also has to be a number.
If FIELD_C is a date then
FIELD_F also has to be a date.
If the column names are different, the SQL
engine will generally just use the column
names from the first SELECT
statement in the data output.
Of course it also makes sense that
the columns represent the same idea.
It may not make sense to
have customer name and
a product type in the same column,
even though they are both text fields.
But, strictly speaking,
SQL won't prevent me from doing that.
So, when would we want to
use the UNION statement?
Let's look at an example.
In some of our other videos,
we used the table we call transactions,
which looked like this.
Notice that this table captures
transaction from a few different
sales channels.
Namely the web, stores and resellers.
What if the data for
this channels would actually produce
by three different source system?
And stored in my data warehouse as
three separate tables, like this.
Here, I have a web purchase table,
a store purchase table and
a reseller purchase table.
In this case, the structures of
the tables are identical, but
they wouldn't have to be.
In fact,
sometimes the reasons I store data in
different tables in the first place, is
because each source might have a number of
elements unique to that particular source.
I wouldn't necessarily want to try to
enforce all those different elements in to
one common table.
In any case, let's say I wanted one
data set and included all transactions.
I'd basically want to stack these
data sets on top of each other.
Here's the SQL query I'd used to do that.
Note that I've three SELECT from clauses,
one for each source table.
With the UNION command between each one.
In each SELECT statement,
I select star to bring back all
the columns from the source table.
And I add one additional static
column would be alias channel
to identify which channel
each transaction came from.
If I run this query I get
the following data set.
It looks very similar to our
original transactions table
with the couple of differences.
First, the columns are in the order
that I defined them in the query so
channel is now on the far right.
If I wanted them in a different order,
I could have just typed out the column
names in a different order but for
simplicity I use the star wildcard and
put channel at the end.
Secondly, the transactions themselves are
ordered as they were in the source tables
and how they were stacked in my query.
If I wanted the data
sets sorted differently,
I'd use the order by command to
return the rows in a different order.
Here's an example of a query that
would produce exactly the same
output as our original transactions table.
SELECT Transaction_ID, Customer_ID,
'WEB' AS Channel, Product,
Price, Discount FROM WEB_PURCHASE
UNION SELECT Transaction_ID,
Customer ID, 'Store' As Channel,
Product, Price, Discount.
FROM Store_Purchase, UNION,
SELECT Transaction_ID,
Customer_ID, 'Reseller' AS Channel,
Product, Price,
Discount FROM RESELLER_PURCHASE
ORDER BY TRANSACTION_ID.
Now that we've added the UNION command or
SQL toolkit, we have enough commands at
our disposal to write most queries that
we need to extract data for analysis.
Let's think about that.
We've really only covered eight commands.
SELECT, FROM, JOIN ON, WHERE,
GROUP BY, ORDER BY, and UNION.
Now to be fair,
there's a lot more we can learn.
In fact in other videos we'll
extend our understanding of SQL by
introducing some ideas like operators and
sub queries.
But in terms of overall SQL structure,
it's really just as simple
as these eight commands.
If you have a good understanding of these,
you'll be well on your way to getting
the data you need to crush that analysis.